inspectit-ocelot-documentation/docs/enduser-monitoring/enduser-monitoring-server.md, before:

---
id: enduser-monitoring-server
title: End User Monitoring Server
sidebar_label: EUM Server
---
This server provides Enduser Monitoring data by using the [OpenCensus](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-java) toolkit.

## Metrics
The inspectit-ocelot server offers a backend for Javascript monitoring with [Boomerang](https://developer.akamai.com/tools/boomerang/docs/index.html).
Boomerang is a Javascript metrics agent, which is able to capture arbitrary customizable metrics. 
By injecting the following snipped in your webpage, all measured metrics are sent to the inspectit-ocelot-eum-server:
```javascript
<script src="boomerang-1.0.0.min.js"></script>
 <script src="plugins/rt.js"></script>
 <!-- any other plugins you want to include -->
 <script>
   BOOMR.init({
     beacon_url: "http://[inspectit-eum-server-url]:8080/beacon/"
   });
 </script>
```
Boomerang recommends to use an advanced injection, where the boomerang agent is loaded in an asynchronous way. 
For further information, please visit the [Boomerang documentation](https://developer.akamai.com/tools/boomerang/docs/index.html).

If enabled, the server exposes the metrics by using the [Prometheus exporter](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-java/tree/master/exporters/stats/prometheus).
A tutorial on how to install Prometheus can be found [here](https://opencensus.io/codelabs/prometheus/#0).

## Server Setup
Before starting the server, please build the server by cloning the repository and executing the following command or download the [latest release](https://github.com/inspectIT/inspectit-ocelot/releases).
```bash
$ ./gradlew build
```
Start the server with the following command:
```bash
$ java -jar inspectit-ocelot-eum-{version}.jar
```
By default, the server is starting with the port `8080`. 
You can simply configure the port by using the Java property `-Dserver.port=[port]`:
```bash
$ java -Dserver.port=[port] -jar inspectit-ocelot-eum-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar
```
Our server is delivered with a default configuration 
supporting the metrics `t_page`, `t_done`, `rt.tstart`, `rt.nstart` and `rt.end` of the Boomerang plugin [RT](https://developer.akamai.com/tools/boomerang/docs/BOOMR.plugins.RT.html).
In order to provide a custom configuration, please set the Java property `-Dspring.config.location=file:[path-to-config]`:

```bash
$ java -Dserver.port=[port] -Dspring.config.location=file:[path-to-config] -jar inspectit-ocelot-eum-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar
```

## Configuration

The configuration file defines the mapping between the concrete Boomerang metric and a OpenCensus metric, as the following sample configuration file shows:

```yaml
inspectit-ocelot-eum-server:
  definitions:
     page_ready_time:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{t_page}"
      unit: ms
      views:
        '[page_ready_time/SUM]': {aggregation: SUM}
        '[page_ready_time/COUNT]': {aggregation: COUNT}

    load_time:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{t_done}"
      beacon-requirements:
        - field: rt.quit
          requirement: NOT_EXISTS
      unit: ms
      views:
        '[load_time/SUM]': {aggregation: SUM}
        '[load_time/COUNT]': {aggregation: COUNT}

    calc_load_time:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{rt.end} - {rt.tstart}"
      beacon-requirements:
        - field: rt.quit
          requirement: NOT_EXISTS
      unit: ms
      views:
        '[calc_load_time/SUM]': {aggregation: SUM}
        '[calc_load_time/COUNT]': {aggregation: COUNT}

    start_timestamp:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{rt.tstart}"
      unit: ms

    navigation_start_timestamp:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{rt.nstart}"
      unit: ms

    end_timestamp:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{rt.end}"
      unit: ms
      views:
        end_timestamp:
          aggregation: LAST_VALUE
          tags: {APPLICATION: true}

  tags:
    extra:
      APPLICATION: my-application
    beacon:
      URL: u
      OS: ua.plt
    define-as-global:
      - URL
      - OS
      - COUNTRY_CODE

  exporters:
    metrics:
      prometheus:
        enabled: true
        host: localhost
        port: 8888
```

### Metrics Definition

A metric is defined the same way as in the inspectIT Ocelot Java agent. Please see the section [Metrics / Custom Metrics](metrics/custom-metrics.md) for detailed information.

In contrast to the agent's metric definition, the EUM server's metric definition contains additional fields.
These additional fields are the following:

| Attributes | Note |
| --- | --- |
| `value-expression` | An expression used to calculate the measure's value from a beacon. |
| `beacon-requirements` | Requirements which have to be fulfilled by Beacons. Beacons which do not match all requirements will be ignored by this metric definition. |

#### Value Expressions

The `value-expression` field can be used to specify a field which value is used for the specified metrics.
In order to reference a field, the following pattern is used: `{FIELD_KEY}`.
For example, a valid expression, used to extract the value of a field `t_load`, would be `{t_load}`.

> Note that a beacon has to contain all fields referenced by the expression in order to be evaluated and recorded.

Value expressions also support operations for basic arithmetic operations. Thus, to calculate a difference of two beacon fields, the following expression can be used:
```YAML
  ...
    my-metric:
      ...
      value-expression: "{field.a} - {field.b}"
      ...
```

Value expression are supporting the following operations:
* addition
* subtraction
* multiplication
* division
* unary plus/minus
* parentheses

Using the operations above, complex calculations can be done, for example:
```YAML
  ...
    my-metric:
      ...
      value-expression: "- {field.c} * ({field.a} - {field.b}) / {field.a}"
      ...
```

#### Beacon Requirements

The `beacon-requirements` field can be used to specify requirements which have to be fulfilled by the beacons in order to be evaluated by a certain metric.
If any requirement does not fit a beacon, the beacon is ignored by the metric.

Beacon requirements consist of two attributes `field` and `requirement`. `field` specified the beacon's field which is validated using the requirement type specified in `NOT_EXISTS`.

```YAML
  ...
    my-metric:
      ...
      beacon-requirements:
        - field: rt.quit
          requirement: NOT_EXISTS
```

The following requirement types are currently be supported:

| Type | Note |
| --- | --- |
| `EXISTS` | The targeted field must exist. |
| `NOT_EXISTS` | The targeted field must not exist. |

### Tags Definition

We distinguish between to different types of tags:

| Attributes | Note |
| --- | --- |
| `extra` | Extra tags define tags, which are manually set in the configuration and can be considered as constants. |
| `beacon` | Beacon tags define tags, whose value is resolved by an incoming beacon entry. |

For example, the following configuration specifies the two tags `APP` and `URL`.
The tag `APP` will always be resolved to the value `my-application`, where the tag `URL` will be resolved to the value of the field `u` of a received beacon.

```YAML
inspectit:
  tags:
    extra:
      APP: my-application
    beacon:
      URL: u
```

#### Default Tags

The EUM server provides a set of default tags which don't have to be specified and always exist. Currently, the following default tags exist:

| Tag | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `COUNTRY_CODE` | Contains the geolocation of the beacon's origin. It is resolved by using the client IP and the [GeoLite2 database](https://www.maxmind.com). If the IP cannot be resolved, the tag value will be empty. |

#### Global Tags

Tags will not be attached to metrics unless a metric explicitly defines to use a certain tag.

In order to simplify the configuration, it is possilbe to define tags which are *always* attached to metrics, even a metric does not explicitly specifies it.
This can be achieved by adding a tag's name to the `define-as-global` property.
Each tag which is listed under this property will be added to each registered metric.

For example, the following configuration causes that each metric will be enriched by a tag called `COUNTRY_CODE`.

```YAML
inspectit:
  tags:
    define-as-global:
      - COUNTRY_CODE
```

## Exporters
By now, the prometheus exporter is available. If `enabled` is set to true, the exporter is exposes the metrics under the following HTTP endpoint: `http://[host]:[port]/metrics`

Commit message:

Closes 342: Option to define custom IP address ranges in the EUM server

inspectit-ocelot-documentation/docs/enduser-monitoring/enduser-monitoring-server.md, after:

---
id: enduser-monitoring-server
title: End User Monitoring Server
sidebar_label: EUM Server
---
This server provides Enduser Monitoring data by using the [OpenCensus](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-java) toolkit.

## Metrics
The inspectit-ocelot server offers a backend for Javascript monitoring with [Boomerang](https://developer.akamai.com/tools/boomerang/docs/index.html).
Boomerang is a Javascript metrics agent, which is able to capture arbitrary customizable metrics. 
By injecting the following snipped in your webpage, all measured metrics are sent to the inspectit-ocelot-eum-server:
```javascript
<script src="boomerang-1.0.0.min.js"></script>
 <script src="plugins/rt.js"></script>
 <!-- any other plugins you want to include -->
 <script>
   BOOMR.init({
     beacon_url: "http://[inspectit-eum-server-url]:8080/beacon/"
   });
 </script>
```
Boomerang recommends to use an advanced injection, where the boomerang agent is loaded in an asynchronous way. 
For further information, please visit the [Boomerang documentation](https://developer.akamai.com/tools/boomerang/docs/index.html).

If enabled, the server exposes the metrics by using the [Prometheus exporter](https://github.com/census-instrumentation/opencensus-java/tree/master/exporters/stats/prometheus).
A tutorial on how to install Prometheus can be found [here](https://opencensus.io/codelabs/prometheus/#0).

## Server Setup
Before starting the server, please build the server by cloning the repository and executing the following command or download the [latest release](https://github.com/inspectIT/inspectit-ocelot/releases).
```bash
$ ./gradlew build
```
Start the server with the following command:
```bash
$ java -jar inspectit-ocelot-eum-{version}.jar
```
By default, the server is starting with the port `8080`. 
You can simply configure the port by using the Java property `-Dserver.port=[port]`:
```bash
$ java -Dserver.port=[port] -jar inspectit-ocelot-eum-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar
```
Our server is delivered with a default configuration 
supporting the metrics `t_page`, `t_done`, `rt.tstart`, `rt.nstart` and `rt.end` of the Boomerang plugin [RT](https://developer.akamai.com/tools/boomerang/docs/BOOMR.plugins.RT.html).
In order to provide a custom configuration, please set the Java property `-Dspring.config.location=file:[path-to-config]`:

```bash
$ java -Dserver.port=[port] -Dspring.config.location=file:[path-to-config] -jar inspectit-ocelot-eum-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar
```

## Configuration

The configuration file defines the mapping between the concrete Boomerang metric and a OpenCensus metric, as the following sample configuration file shows:

```yaml
inspectit-ocelot-eum-server:
  definitions:
     page_ready_time:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{t_page}"
      unit: ms
      views:
        '[page_ready_time/SUM]': {aggregation: SUM}
        '[page_ready_time/COUNT]': {aggregation: COUNT}

    load_time:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{t_done}"
      beacon-requirements:
        - field: rt.quit
          requirement: NOT_EXISTS
      unit: ms
      views:
        '[load_time/SUM]': {aggregation: SUM}
        '[load_time/COUNT]': {aggregation: COUNT}

    calc_load_time:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{rt.end} - {rt.tstart}"
      beacon-requirements:
        - field: rt.quit
          requirement: NOT_EXISTS
      unit: ms
      views:
        '[calc_load_time/SUM]': {aggregation: SUM}
        '[calc_load_time/COUNT]': {aggregation: COUNT}

    start_timestamp:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{rt.tstart}"
      unit: ms

    navigation_start_timestamp:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{rt.nstart}"
      unit: ms

    end_timestamp:
      measure-type: LONG
      value-expression: "{rt.end}"
      unit: ms
      views:
        end_timestamp:
          aggregation: LAST_VALUE
          tags: {APPLICATION: true}

  tags:
    extra:
      APPLICATION: my-application
    
    beacon:
      URL: u
      OS: ua.plt
    
    define-as-global:
      - URL
      - OS
      - COUNTRY_CODE
    
    custom-ip-mapping:
      department-1:
        - 10.10.0.0/16
        - 11.11.0.3
      department-2:
        - 14.14.0.0/16
        - 14.15.0.1
  exporters:
    metrics:
      prometheus:
        enabled: true
        host: localhost
        port: 8888
```

### Metrics Definition

A metric is defined the same way as in the inspectIT Ocelot Java agent. Please see the section [Metrics / Custom Metrics](metrics/custom-metrics.md) for detailed information.

In contrast to the agent's metric definition, the EUM server's metric definition contains additional fields.
These additional fields are the following:

| Attributes | Note |
| --- | --- |
| `value-expression` | An expression used to calculate the measure's value from a beacon. |
| `beacon-requirements` | Requirements which have to be fulfilled by Beacons. Beacons which do not match all requirements will be ignored by this metric definition. |

#### Value Expressions

The `value-expression` field can be used to specify a field which value is used for the specified metrics.
In order to reference a field, the following pattern is used: `{FIELD_KEY}`.
For example, a valid expression, used to extract the value of a field `t_load`, would be `{t_load}`.

> Note that a beacon has to contain all fields referenced by the expression in order to be evaluated and recorded.

Value expressions also support operations for basic arithmetic operations. Thus, to calculate a difference of two beacon fields, the following expression can be used:
```YAML
  ...
    my-metric:
      ...
      value-expression: "{field.a} - {field.b}"
      ...
```

Value expression are supporting the following operations:
* addition
* subtraction
* multiplication
* division
* unary plus/minus
* parentheses

Using the operations above, complex calculations can be done, for example:
```YAML
  ...
    my-metric:
      ...
      value-expression: "- {field.c} * ({field.a} - {field.b}) / {field.a}"
      ...
```

#### Beacon Requirements

The `beacon-requirements` field can be used to specify requirements which have to be fulfilled by the beacons in order to be evaluated by a certain metric.
If any requirement does not fit a beacon, the beacon is ignored by the metric.

Beacon requirements consist of two attributes `field` and `requirement`. `field` specified the beacon's field which is validated using the requirement type specified in `NOT_EXISTS`.

```YAML
  ...
    my-metric:
      ...
      beacon-requirements:
        - field: rt.quit
          requirement: NOT_EXISTS
```

The following requirement types are currently be supported:

| Type | Note |
| --- | --- |
| `EXISTS` | The targeted field must exist. |
| `NOT_EXISTS` | The targeted field must not exist. |

### Tags Definition

We distinguish between to different types of tags:

| Attributes | Note |
| --- | --- |
| `extra` | Extra tags define tags, which are manually set in the configuration and can be considered as constants. |
| `beacon` | Beacon tags define tags, whose value is resolved by an incoming beacon entry. |

For example, the following configuration specifies the two tags `APP` and `URL`.
The tag `APP` will always be resolved to the value `my-application`, where the tag `URL` will be resolved to the value of the field `u` of a received beacon.

```YAML
inspectit:
  tags:
    extra:
      APP: my-application
    beacon:
      URL: u
```

#### Default Tags

The EUM server provides a set of default tags which don't have to be specified and always exist. Currently, the following default tags exist:

| Tag | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `COUNTRY_CODE` | Contains the geolocation of the beacon's origin. It is resolved by using the client IP and the [GeoLite2 database](https://www.maxmind.com). If the IP cannot be resolved, the tag value will be empty. |

##### Custom COUNTRY_CODE Mapping

Besides using the internal GeoLite2 database, it is possible to define custom IP mappings.
The property `custom-ip-mapping` holds a map of possible tag values, which are mapped to certain IPs or CIDRs.
The tag values are published with the tag `COUNTRY_CODE` and have a higher priority than the results of the GeoLite2 database.
If the IP cannot be resolved with the custom mapping, the mapping of the GeoLite2 database will be used.

```YAML
inspectit:
  tags:
    custom-ip-mapping:
      department-1:
        - 10.10.0.0/16
        - 11.11.0.3
      department-2:
        - 14.14.0.0/16
        - 14.15.0.1
```
#### Global Tags

Tags will not be attached to metrics unless a metric explicitly defines to use a certain tag.

In order to simplify the configuration, it is possible to define tags which are *always* attached to metrics, even a metric does not explicitly specifies it.
This can be achieved by adding a tag's name to the `define-as-global` property.
Each tag which is listed under this property will be added to each registered metric.

For example, the following configuration causes that each metric will be enriched by a tag called `COUNTRY_CODE`.

```YAML
inspectit:
  tags:
    define-as-global:
      - COUNTRY_CODE
```

## Exporters
By now, the prometheus exporter is available. If `enabled` is set to true, the exporter is exposes the metrics under the following HTTP endpoint: `http://[host]:[port]/metrics`
